We live in very stressful times.
First Peter 5:8
indicates that Satan the Devil
is bitterly angry
and “walks about like a roaring lion.”
Throughout the Bible,
we learn that God-fearing
worshippers of Jehovah in the past
faced circumstances that produced anxiety.
For example, at Psalm 13:2,
King David asked:
“How long will I have anxious concern,
with grief in my heart each day?”
Please find with me Luke 22:42-44.
Even Jesus, a perfect man,
experienced the agony
of intense anxiety
on the night of his betrayal.
Here is what he prayed at Luke 22:42:
“Father, if you want to,
“remove this cup from me.
“Nevertheless, let, not my will,
but yours take place.”
He knew what he was in for.
Well, what happened?
Verse 43:
“Then an angel from heaven
appeared to him and strengthened him.”
An angel was dispatched to encourage Jesus.
Did that instantly erase
his anxious concerns?
No.
Let’s read verse 44:
“But he was in such agony
“that he kept praying more earnestly;
“and his sweat became as drops of blood
falling to the ground.”
Have you ever been
that anxious about anything,
your sweat becoming drops of blood?
Probably not.
But you did not have the salvation
of the world of mankind on your shoulders!
The point is that all
of Jehovah’s servants in these last days
will have bouts of anxiety.
For many around the world,
it might be the high cost of food,
clothing, and shelter.
In the wake of the pandemic,
this anxiety is likely being
experienced by more
of our brothers than would
normally be the case.
Some of you live in neighborhoods
with a high crime rate
and violence all around.
Others face temptation
from workmates or schoolmates
to be dishonest or immoral.
Then there are family issues, health issues,
emotional issues, the death of loved ones.
All of these can be causes of anxiety.
Still others of our brothers and sisters
face mistreatment and abuse
from family members,
governmental oppression,
and from false religious elements
that foment hate and prejudice.
The title of this talk is
“Strive for Calm When Facing Anxious Times.”
Is “calm” even possible?
Jehovah came to the assistance
of his servants in the past.
Today, he makes it possible
for us to gain a measure of calm
when facing distress or anxiety.
Locate 1 Peter 5:6, 7, please.
Verse 7 describes an action
we can take with our anxiety.
Let’s read verses 6 and 7:
“Humble yourselves, therefore,
“under the mighty hand of God,
“so that he may exalt you in due time,
“while you throw all your anxiety on him,
because he cares for you.”
Did you notice the time element in verse 6?
It said that Jehovah
will “exalt you in due time.”
So not necessarily immediately.
If you are facing anxious moments,
what do you do in the meantime?
It is the action that’s described in verse 7:
“Throw all your anxiety on [Jehovah].”
If we throw something,
what are we left holding in our hand?
Nothing.
We don’t keep the anxiety
bottled up inside ourselves.
We throw all of it on our God.
You might be thinking,
‘My anxiety is so heavy and burdensome
that I can’t even pick it up,
let alone throw it anywhere!’
Let’s look at a related scripture
in the book of Psalms—Psalm 37:5.
Instead of “throw,”
it uses the word “commit.”
Verse 5:
“Commit your way to Jehovah;
rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.”
It said: “Commit your way.”
The footnote says this could be translated:
“Roll your way upon” Jehovah.
So if your anxiety seems too heavy
to throw on Jehovah, give it a push.
Try rolling it on him.
How do we “throw,” “commit,”
or “roll” our anxious thoughts on Jehovah?
Let’s open our Bibles to Philippians 4:6, 7:
“Do not be anxious over anything,
“but in everything by prayer and supplication
“along with thanksgiving,
“let your petitions be made known to God;
“and the peace of God
“that surpasses all understanding
“will guard your hearts
“and your mental powers
by means of Christ Jesus.”
We throw
or roll our anxiety on Jehovah
by means of fervent prayer.
Pour your heart out to God.
You can tell Jehovah anything,
even if it is embarrassing to you.
Remember,
Jehovah is not going to tell anyone about it.
Throw or roll it on him.
And what did verse 7 say
would be the result of such prayers?
It said that “the peace of God,”
yes, a calm tranquility comes over us
when we fully trust
Jehovah’s power to sustain us.
How else can our heart calm down?
Share your anxiety
with trusted friends in the congregation,
including an elder you feel comfortable with.
Hebrews 10:25 says
that when we meet together,
we receive encouragement.
Or, in these uncertain times,
instead of meeting together,
it might be that letters,
e-mails, or texts
from your concerned brothers and sisters
will have a similar effect.
What else can have a calming effect on us?
Reading applicable portions of God’s Word
and meditating on them.
For example, in Isaiah chapter 41,
is this describing
walking hand in hand with God?
Or is this describing
Jehovah reaching into your life
and saving you from calamity and anxiety?
Let’s compare two verses in Isaiah 41.
Notice his promise in verse 10:
“Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
“Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
“I will fortify you, yes, I will help you,
“I will really hold on to you
with my right hand of righteousness.”
Did you notice that Jehovah tells you
not to be afraid or anxious?
Why?
Because he will hold on to you
with his right hand.
In verses 11 and 12,
it describes some tragic circumstances
we might face in life.
Now, in verse 13:
“For I, Jehovah your God,
“am grasping your right hand,
“the One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid.
I will help you.’”
Do you see the point?
This is not describing a stroll with God.
This is not describing
walking hand in hand with God.
This is a rescue mission by God!
If it was a casual stroll with God,
your left hand would be in his right hand.
But the two verses say
that Jehovah grasps your right hand
with his right hand.
It is as if Jehovah is facing you.
He sees your dire plight.
He reaches out with his right hand
and grasps your right hand
and pulls you up and out to safety.
Specific Bible verses
calm us down and reassure us.
The three aspects we’ve considered:
(1) prayer,
(2) encouragement from our brothers,
and (3) meditating on the Scriptures
were mentioned by four brothers in Russia
who have been convicted to prison sentences.
Please watch the following video.
I was detained at the airport
at four in the morning.
Right at the check-in desk,
an FSB officer came up to us
and said that investigative measures
were being taken against us.
There was a knock at the door,
and I understood that they had come for me.
It all happened very quickly.
First, they detained us,
then they handcuffed us,
then they searched us.
A jeep with tinted windows blocked the road.
Then with shouts of “Stay where you are!”
they twisted my arms and threw me
onto the hood of my automobile.
The next day, a court imposed
preventive measures on me, and I was taken
to the pretrial detention facility
in Khabarovsk.
I was taken to a dark room
in the prison and shut in.
Then I got on my knees
and prayed to Jehovah
telling him that I wanted to stand firm
in the face of the trials
and remain faithful to him.
When I was in the detention cell,
every evening
I prayed for my friends, my wife,
my children
—everyone I know—
and tried to think about their circumstances
and pray specifically.
Once, I started praying
to Jehovah for help with tears
because things
were getting very difficult for me.
But then things started changing,
which (as I understood)
Jehovah had already arranged
at the start of that day.
I prayed for boldness
and to be courageous, calm, and kind.
And Jehovah gave me the strength for that.
I felt calm when I talked with them,
and I didn’t feel afraid
of consequences or anything.
I prayed to Jehovah and asked him to show me
that he was close by,
that he was doing something,
and that the whole situation
was under his control.
And the first letter I received
that morning was about the sun.
Interestingly, I had read a lot of articles
about the sun and understood
that Jehovah’s immense strength
and power are manifested in it.
But that day I especially felt it.
The first letters that I received
were about God’s qualities
and about the qualities that I needed
to display in that specific situation.
They weren’t just encouraging to me.
They were also a fine witness
to the administration.
The guards were amazed.
They asked:
“Vanya, who is writing to you from Krasnodar?
I’ve got friends there.”
And then about other places—
They wrote to me from France, from America.
The letters enabled them to see
that the situation is under control.
A huge number of people
know about me, about my circumstances.
Their actions are being carefully observed
by many people.
Talks, topics for talks,
items for meetings—these are things I took
from the letters that I received each day.
From one letter, I would take, for example,
material for a ten-minute talk,
and from another,
I could make a public talk.
Because I was able
to collect quotes from various letters,
I eventually had an entire library.
I was able to compare and collect information
and then conduct high-quality,
excellent personal study
that helped me keep in step
with the organization at that time.
A boy drew a picture and sent it to me.
He wrote,
“If you remain faithful,
you will be in the new world.”
An elderly sister
began her letter
with these warm words: “Greetings, my son!”
She shared her feelings with me.
Her letter came
at one of the most difficult times for me.
I felt that Jehovah
comforts us in a special way through letters.
I made the following schedule:
I got up early in the morning at 5:30 a.m.
While everyone else in the cell was snoozing
and all was quiet,
I was able to read the Bible.
I would think a great deal
about a particular verse.
The more I reflected on it,
the more I saw how beautiful it was.
By the end of the day, the verse became
stunningly beautiful and unique to me.
Then I understood that a good heart is formed
not by the amount that you take in
but by the amount
you can retain in your heart.
When you read the Bible
in a pretrial detention cell,
it takes on new meaning.
When I read the book of Acts,
the things that happened
to Paul became especially understandable.
It strengthened me
and showed me that I could
get through these times just as he did.
Mordecai’s experience
from the Bible went to my heart.
After Haman had made
an agreement with the king
to destroy the Israelites,
he went out and met Mordecai.
And it says that Mordecai
‘did not rise and did not tremble.’
The main point is that now
just as then as with Mordecai,
we don’t tremble.
When applying the three elements
of prayer, encouragement from our brothers,
and meditating on God’s Word,
what did that produce?
It helped the brothers
to be calm and trust in Jehovah.
Let’s look at the final scripture
for this talk.
Please find Isaiah 30:15.
What a beautiful verse for us to keep in mind
when facing these anxious times!
Unfortunately,
the Israelites were not willing
to listen to this
profound directive from Jehovah.
Please read it with me, Isaiah 30:15:
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah,
“the Holy One of Israel, says:
“‘By returning to me and resting,
“‘you will be saved;
“‘your strength will be in keeping calm
“and showing trust.’
But you were unwilling.”
What about us?
Will we be willing or unwilling?
As we face these anxious times
and even more turbulent times ahead,
will we take to heart Jehovah’s admonition?
Did you notice where your strength
of character and fortitude will come from?
It is by “keeping calm
and showing trust.”
And that, brothers and sisters,
is our 2021 yeartext!
“Your strength will be in keeping calm
and showing trust,” Isaiah 30:15.
We will face anxious times ahead!
By means of prayer,
encouragement from each other,
and leaning on God’s insightful Word,
what can we experience
during these last days?
We can keep a sense of calm
and fully trust
in the Sovereign of the universe,
our great God, Jehovah!